Nick's .NET DI post (#1073)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-02-10-dotnet-dependency-injection-comparison.md

tags: [csharp-8, csharp-9, dotnet, dotnetcore, csharp, aspnetcore, di, dependencyinjection, ]
tweets:
- "Confused about #DI? Learn how to compare #dependencyinjection options in #dotnet ->"
- "Get up to speed on using the right #dependencyinjection for your #dotnet project"
- "Wondering how to add #DI to your #dotnet apps? We've got you covered with this post!"
image: blog/featured/okta-dotnet-books-quarter.jpg
type: conversion
---

## Why you should care about dependency injection

Dependency injection is a tried and proven design pattern for producing code that is testable, readable, and reusable. This is achieved by creating (or increasing) a *separation of concerns*, where each class has a dedicated area of responsibility.  

Dependency injection is just one design pattern used to achieve *inversion of control* in which the calling code, or *client*, has no knowledge of the inner workings of the dependency, also called the *service*. The calling code only needs to know the interface of the dependency so it can call the dependency correctly. In dependency injection, the service is injected into the client class or function where it is used.  

> This makes it easier to test code by mocking, or stubbing, the service code for predictable results that the client can operate on. For example, if your service calls a database and returns an entity, you can mock this code to always return the entity and eliminate concerns such as the entity not being found, the connection to the database being unavailable, or other issues that may arise in the service. You can test the client code as though the service will always perform in a specific way, thus making the client code easier to write.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This makes it easier to test code by mocking—or stubbing—the service code for predictable results that the client can operate on. For example, if your service calls a database and returns an entity, you can mock this code to always return the entity and eliminate concerns such as the entity not being found, the connection to the database being unavailable, or other issues that may arise in the service. You can test the client code as though the service will always perform in a specific way, thus making the client code easier to write.
```
clarity

While many of these libraries did extend support into .NET Core, these days the de facto way of achieving inversion of control is Microsoft's implementation of dependency injection in .NET Core and beyond.

In this article, you will learn to use the default implementation of dependency injection that comes with .NET 5. You will see how to register services with different service lifetimes and understand the differences between those service lifetimes. You will also learn how to inject services into controllers, which is the most common usage of services in ASP.Net Core, and how to inject services into middleware. And I will show you how to write services so that they can be injected.  

> The example application will consist of a single page withs three pieces of information; your application's name with randomized upper and lower case letters, the number of requests made to the server, and a list of users from your Okta account. Each of these three pieces of information will be obtained from their service. Each service will have a different service lifetime.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example application will consist of a single page with three pieces of information; your application's name with randomized upper and lower case letters, the number of requests made to the server, and a list of users from your Okta account. Each of these three pieces of information will be obtained from its respective service. Each service will have a different service lifetime.  
```
typo. grammatical clarity.

## Prerequisites

- Basic knowledge of .NET
- [.NET 5](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/5.0)
- [Your favorite IDE (I'll be using Visual Studio 2022)](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/)
- [An Okta account](https://developer.okta.com/signup/)

If you wish to download the code immediately you can do that [on my GitHub repository](https://github.com/oktadev/okta-dependencyinjection-dotnet-example).

## Set up Okta for the SDK

Open your Okta admin console and navigate to the *Tokens* tab on the *API* page. Click on **Create Token** and give it a meaningful name. You will be shown the API key. Make note of this as you will need it in your application.

## Create your ASP.NET Core application

If you are using Visual Studio 2022 you can follow the instructions below.

First, open Visual Studio and then click **Create Project**. In the *Create a new project* pane select `ASP.Net Core Web App (Model-View-Controller)` as your template.  

{% img blog/dotnet-di-compare/image1.png alt:"" width:"400" %}{: .center-image }

> Click **Next** and under *Configure your new project* and name it `OktaDependencyInjection` and press **Next**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Next** and under *Configure your new project* name it `OktaDependencyInjection`, then press **Next**.
```
grammar/typo

### Create your view and model

Next, you want to create the view that your users will see. In this application, you are only displaying one page to the user so this work is pretty light.  

#### Add your view model

In the `Models` folder create a new file called `HomeModel.cs`. Add the following code to it.

```csharp
using Okta.Sdk;
using System.Collections.Generic;

namespace OktaDependencyInjection.Models
{
    public class HomeModel
    {
        public string ApplicationName { get; set; }

        public List<User> Users { get; set; }

        public int NumberOfHits { get; set; }

        public HomeModel() { }

        public HomeModel(string applicationName, List<User> users, int numberOfHits)
        {
            ApplicationName = applicationName;  
            Users = users;
            NumberOfHits = numberOfHits;
        }
    }
}
```

This model will contain the application name and a list of users associated with your Okta account. It will also have the number of times that a request has been made against your website since the last time the application was started.  

> #### Edit the Home View

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Edit the home view
```
sentence case - style guide

                        <li class="nav-item">
                            <a class="nav-link text-dark" asp-area="" asp-controller="Home" asp-action="Privacy">Privacy</a>
                        </li>
                    </ul>
                </div>
            </div>
        </nav>
    </header>
    <div class="container">
        <main role="main" class="pb-3">
            @RenderBody()
        </main>
    </div>

    <footer class="border-top footer text-muted">
        <div class="container">
            &copy; 2022 - <a href="https://profile.fishbowlllc.com" target="_blank" rel="noreferrer">Nik Fisher</a>
        </div>
    </footer>
    <script src="~/lib/jquery/dist/jquery.min.js"></script>
    <script src="~/lib/bootstrap/dist/js/bootstrap.bundle.min.js"></script>
    <script src="~/js/site.js" asp-append-version="true"></script>
    @await RenderSectionAsync("Scripts", required: false)
</body>
</html>
```

### Setting up the dependency injection

This is the last piece of code you can write before you start to focus on the dependency injection. Now, to populate your model and keep track of the number of hits, you will need to set up some middleware and services.  

> #### Write your Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Write your services
```
sentence case

The last service to add is the `RandomUpperAndLowerService`. Start by adding the `IRandomUpperAndLowerService.cs` file to the `Services/Interfaces` folder with the code below.

```csharp
namespace OktaDependencyInjection.Services.Interfaces
{
    public interface IRandomUpperAndLowerService
    {
        string RandomizeString(string input);
    }
}
```

Now add its implementation to the `Services` folder. Call this file `RandomUpperAndLowerService.cs` and add the code below to it.

```csharp
using System;
using System.Collections.Generic;

namespace OktaDependencyInjection.Services
{
    public class RandomUpperAndLowerService : Interfaces.IRandomUpperAndLowerService
    {
        public string RandomizeString(string input)
        {
            List<char> chars = new();
            var rand = new Random();

            foreach (var c in input.ToCharArray())
            {
                var next = rand.Next(0, 2);
                chars.Add(next == 0 ? char.ToUpper(c) : char.ToLower(c));
            }

            return new string(chars.ToArray());
        }
    }
}
```

> While it's a silly function, this class will take a string and randomize if the text should be uppercase or lowercase. It will `pRodUCe STriNgS lIkE THiS`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although it's a silly function, this class will take a string and randomize if the text should be uppercase or lowercase. It will `pRodUCe STriNgS lIkE THiS`.  
```
removes ambiguity

#### Using your services in middleware

Add a new folder called `Middleware` to your project. In it, add a file called `HitTracker.cs` and add the following middleware code.

```csharp
using System.Threading.Tasks;
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Http;

using OktaDependencyInjection.Services.Interfaces;

namespace OktaDependencyInjection.Middleware
{
    public class HitTracker
    {
        private readonly RequestDelegate _next;
        private readonly INumberOfHitsService _numberOfHitsService;

        public HitTracker(RequestDelegate next, INumberOfHitsService numberOfHitsService)
        {
            _next = next;
            _numberOfHitsService = numberOfHitsService;
        }

        public async Task InvokeAsync(HttpContext context)
        {
            _numberOfHitsService.NumberOfHits += 1;
            await _next(context);
        }
    }
}
```

> Middleware is code that executes in your request pipeline. For example, authorizing a user is middleware. Before any controller code is called, your application will attempt to authorize the user and if that fails, it will handle an unauthorized user as instructed. If the user is unauthorized there is no need to tie up resources calling controller code.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Middleware is code that executes in your request pipeline. For example, authorizing a user is middleware. Before any controller code is called, your application will attempt to authorize the user and if that fails, it will handle an unauthorized user as instructed. If the user is unauthorized, there is no need to tie up resources calling controller code.  
```
comma clarifies "there"
